# Landing Your First Dev Job

It’s been a little over a year since I began dedicating most of my free-time to learning web development. Prior to this, I had experience playing around with C# and Unity and was working professionally as a digital marketer who had crossed into other areas, including HTML emails, WordPress/Wix development, and Salesforce development. It was this crossover that peaked my interest in becoming a developer, but, with only the HTML and CSS I picked up from working with HTML emails, WordPress and Wix, I knew there was a lot more I’d need to learn before I was ready to make the career change. Six months later I landed my first Front-End Developer job. This is how I got there:


## Finding a Mentor

Online tutorials were key early on, but, with so many options, it can be difficult for a noobie to gain their bearings. What do I learn? What is JavaScript? It must be like Java… No, no it isn’t Java… How about Python? I hear that’s cool. But what about C, and C#, and C++ and all these other single letter languages.
It can be overwhelming.

Some sites make it convenient. freeCodeCamp helped set me on a path introducing me to the fundamentals in a flow that made sense. Other options include web developer courses on Udemy or Lynda that claim to take you from beginner to advanced and will provide you with certificates upon completion (make sure to pay attention to reviews and update dates… don’t learn dated material!!!). While I question the lasting value of these certificates, they do act as a nice padding for your initial job search and will probably leave you with a finished project that you can show off.

For me, having a mentor early on was crucial for getting me on the right path. I sent out messages to dozens of people who I knew were in the field — from game developers to web developers to IT workers to OG developers who were long out of the scene. Many were no more than past acquaintances who ghosted my messages, but there were also several who were willing to at least give me some useful advice and some who were were willing to do more. It is from them that I got more clarity on what it was to be a web developer, what kind of demand and reward there would be for my services, what I really needed to be learning, how to effectively learn, and various tips and tricks. I still reach out to them today, and much of my early studies were the result of conversations with these people.

Recruiters will also be important in the beginning. Even if they don’t get you a job right away, recruiters can be an invaluable resource. They can expand your network, find potential jobs for you, and get your resume seen, and they can provide insight into your local companies and what kind of skill set they’re looking for. Best of all, they find you! Just keep an updated LinkedIn with what you’ve learned so far or frequently attend Meetups, and recruiters will find you. Updating your LinkedIn regularly, even if it is minor alteration, will help improve the chances you show up in recruiter searches.

Don’t be afraid to reach out to people, even if you hardly know them. Networking is absolutely key to this stage in your new career, especially if you are going the self-taught route. Attend social events and workshops to build your network. Meetup is a great place to find these events.


## Stay Out of the Weeds!

There is a lot to learn before you’re ready for your first job. As I said above, this can become overwhelming, but it doesn’t have to be.

Once you get better at programming, it will start to feel like you have magic powers, and you’re going to want to exercise these magic powers. Your brain is going to come up with all sorts of wonderful things you can build. Friends and family are going to start pitching ideas to you. Suddenly you’ll become a go-to for any technological issues people are having (if you aren’t already). You might want to build games or be creative or spend time perfecting the look of your new calculator or to-do list or make a to-do list in VR. While these things will surely improve some area of your web dev experience and possibly provide nice portfolio pieces, chances are it will be a detriment to the speed in which you learn and your potential employers may not care about it as much as you do.

Your number one priority should be to get a job as a web developer. You need to have some discipline here, because it will surely payoff, and these other things will still be around when you’re employed. Keep these ideas, write them down in a notebook, build on them in your head, but save these types of projects for down the road when you have secured a job. There will be no greater learning experience than when you actually start working 40 hours a week, getting paid well in a professional environment with other developers, and chances are you will not be employed unless you have some key skills at your disposal. When I got my full-time job as a front-end developer, my availability to work on code jumped from 20 hours a week (provided by a sleep sacrifice) to 60 hours a week, working with other developers on real-world tasks with deadlines. Best part is you will be pushed to do the things you wouldn’t normally do. It can be very easy for a new developer to get caught up on HTML and CSS because that is what they are comfortable with.

I would also strongly recommend that you avoid becoming too reliant on a framework or library while you’re first learning. Early on in my studies I was told I should learn React, so that’s what I did. While I was able to pick it up, I had rushed through vanilla JavaScript to get there, and I now realize I should have been more patient and furthered my understanding of plain old JavaScript before I tried to move on to React. Some would argue that working with a framework or library may help you become a better JavaScript developer, but, as someone who tried that, I would say I disagree. Working with vanilla JavaScript has given me a much more in-depth understanding about what is actually going on behind the scenes than React ever provided me, and it has made me a better React developer as a result. Definitely check out frameworks and get skilled with at least one, but don’t put the cart before the horse!


## Am I Ready?

So you’ve found a mentor, completed a bunch of courses, got your fundamentals down… kinda (you’ll continue to work on fundamentals for a very long time), have experience with a framework… What next?

After many sleepless nights of trying to cram studying into a schedule that was mostly dedicated to my family and full-time job, I was at the point where I knew to carve out more time to code, I’d need to sleep even less or land my first dev job. I opted for the latter and didn’t really care about rejection. I tried not to blast companies I was seriously interested in, but I made enough noise in my first round to get attention from recruiters, and from them I received resume/experience critiques, info on the local market, and additional recommendations. I was also setup with a couple of interviews, and while they didn’t work out due to inexperience and some choppy technical interviews, I did get some interview practice and recommendations afterwards that helped me tremendously.

My big break came when I met my current lead dev at a local event I found on Meetup. It was the second Meetup I ever attended, and I went with the intention of meeting recruiters, potential employers, and other job hunters. I didn’t expect to land a job, but I did get a promising connection in my current lead dev, and, following another technical interview, I landed the job.

Was I ready? The simple answer is yes — I got the job and I’ve done well ever since, but there was definitely more to learn, and, as a new developer, there were times I questioned my readiness. As I said earlier, I had rushed into React and knew it better than anything, almost to the point of reliance. My fundamentals were slacking, and because my new job wasn’t using React, I had a steeper entry than I believe I would’ve if I had drilled down on the fundamentals. Trudging through the basics of new frameworks/libraries/projects had an impact on my confidence the first couple weeks.

But this isn’t abnormal. The imposter syndrome is real, and, from my interactions with other new developers, it seems common. I still attend Meetups, many of which are at boot camps, and I interact with new developers all the time. Many are still in a boot camp or fresh on their first job, and this feeling of inadequacy is mutual among us. The reality of our profession is that there is a lot to learn, and you’re probably not going to stop learning for the rest of your career. Worst part is, the more you learn, the more you realize you don’t know. Continued self-education HAS to be something that you’re willing to accept if you want to be successful and persist in this rapidly evolving industry.

Working in a professional setting, with a team, and on larger projects that you have no choice but to finish, will improve your coding abilities tremendously. You will be exposed to all sorts of projects that you wouldn’t have considered on your own, and you will have to learn new things to get them done. Having forty hours a week to code with peer support is invaluable. My programming skills would be at a fraction of what they are today if I didn’t have this opportunity and was still trying to cram studying into my nights and weekends.

My tip? Fake it till you make it! You’re probably more prepared than you feel, especially those first couple of days, and, if not, then you’ll just have to work harder and continue to learn.
